A healthy diet plays a key role in preventing obesity and non-communicable diseases such as type 2 diabetes. This is true for all age groups, including young adults. While unhealthy eating habits among young adults, in particular university students, have been identified in former studies, this group has been neglected in existing health promotion strategies. Our aim was to explore baseline dietary intake, common barriers to healthy eating, and changes in eating behaviour among university students since the time of matriculation. We used data from the quantitative part of the Nutrition and Physical Activity Study (NuPhA), a cross-sectional online survey (data collection: 2014/10/31–2015/01/15). Students were recruited from all over Germany. Overall, 689 university students (30.5% male; mean age: 22.69) from more than 40 universities across Germany participated. We found that there is room for improvement with regard to the consumption of specific food groups, for example, fruits and vegetables. The main barriers to healthy eating were lack of time due to studies, lack of healthy meals at the university canteen, and high prices of healthy foods. Cluster analysis revealed that barriers to healthy eating might affect only specific subgroups, for instance freshmen. Changes in eating behaviour since matriculation were found in the consumption of meat, fish, and regular meals. Future qualitative studies may help to explore why university students change their eating behaviour since the time of matriculation. Such knowledge is necessary to inform health promotion strategies in the university setting.
Introduction
A healthy diet is widely recognized as a main factor in preventing obesity and non-communicable diseases such as type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease (World Health Organisation, 2016). Therefore, following a healthy diet should be promoted across all age groups. According to the WHO (2016) a healthy diet should include, for instance, high consumption of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, in addition to low consumption of saturated fats, salt, and refined carbohydrates. The transition from adolescence to young adulthood may be a particularly important time for health promotion strategies, including the promotion of healthy eating, because many health behaviours are developed and established during this period (Nelson et al., 2008, Poobalan et al., 2014). However, current studies indicate that poor dietary habits seem to be common among this age group. Former studies report, for example, high levels of fast food consumption, low intake of fruits and vegetables, and breakfast skipping (Larson et al., 2012, Niemeier et al., 2006). Furthermore, excessive weight gain has been observed among young adults (Gordon-Larsen et al., 2004, Mensink et al., 2013, Nelson Laska et al., 2010), particularly university students (Mihalopoulos et al., 2008, Racette et al., 2005).
The transition from school to university coincides changing living arrangements, which might also result in a reorientation of eating behaviours (El Ansari, Stock, & Mikolajczyk, 2012). However, only a few studies have focused on potential changes in eating behaviour since matriculation (Lupi et al., 2015, Nelson Laska et al., 2010, Wengreen and Moncur, 2009). In addition, little is known about the reasons which may prevent university students from following a healthy diet. Thus, we aimed to a) describe the baseline dietary intake of university students, b) identify potential barriers to healthy eating and c) explore potential changes in their eating behaviour since the time of matriculation.
Section snippets
Study design and sample
The analyses are based on data from the quantitative part of the Nutrition and Physical Activity Study (NuPhA), a cross-sectional online survey among university students conducted across Germany from October 2014 to January 2015. University students were recruited via fliers, mailing lists, social networks, and advertising the study during classes and lectures. Students received information on the study aims and data security regulations; they were informed that participation was voluntary and
Results
The sample included 689 university students (30.5% male; Table 1) aged 16–29 years from more than 40 universities across Germany. Approximately 35% of them were undergraduate students in the first to third semesters. The majority of the students (74.2%) had left their hometown to enrol at university.
Discussion
In our nationwide NuPhA Study we found that there is room for improvement with regard to the intake of specific food groups like fruits and vegetables. The main barriers to healthy eating were identified as lack of time due to studies, lack of healthy food at the university canteen, and high costs of healthy foods. In addition, most of the students reported changes in eating behaviour since matriculation.
According to the WHO (2016) a healthy diet includes the consumption of at least five
Conclusion
The results of our study indicate that changes in eating behaviour occur among university students since the time of matriculation. However, barriers to healthy eating may differ among university students and seem to affect only specific subgroups, for instance freshmen. Qualitative studies may be helpful to further explore the motives that shape the changes in eating behaviour since the time of matriculation. Such knowledge is necessary to inform health promotion strategies that enable healthy 
Financial support
The NuPhA Study is partially funded by the “Institut Danone Ernährung für Gesundheit e.V.”, Haar, Germany (project no: 2014/01). The funding organisation had no role in the design, analysis and interpretation of the data; in the writing of this manuscript; and to submit the manuscript for publication.
Conflicts of interest
none.
Authorship
Author contributions were as follows: J.H. and K.D. defined the conception and design of the study. J.H. conducted the statistical analysis. J.H. and K.D. wrote the manuscript. A.L. carefully reviewed the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript, as well as contributing to the interpretation of the findings.
Acknowledgements
We thank all university students that participated in the quantitative part of the NuPhA Study.